“Larry was a critical member of my team as we faced down the worst 
economic crisis since the Great Depression, and it was in no small 
part because of his expertise, wisdom and leadership that we wrest
led the economy back to growth and made the kind of progress we are
 seeing today,” Mr. Obama said in the statement.

He added: “I will always be grateful to Larry for his tireless work
 and service on behalf of his country, and I look forward to continuing
  to seek his guidance and counsel in the future.”

Mr. Summers appeared to have been the White House’s favored candidate
 to succeed Ben S. Bernanke as chairman of the Fed, though Mr. Obama had repeatedly
  said he had not yet made a decision between Mr. Summers, Janet L. Yellen, who
   is a vice chairwoman of the Fed, or someone else.

But Mr. Summers’s reputation for being brusque, his comments about
 women’s natural aptitude in mathematics and science, and his decisions
  on financial regulatory matters in the Clinton and Obama administrations
   had made him a controversial choice.

Three Senate Democrats on the Banking Committee had come out against
 Mr. Summers’s nomination, meaning that the White House might have had 
 to barter for as many as three Republican votes for him even to pass out of committee.

In a letter to the president, Mr. Summers said that he had “recently
 concluded that any possible confirmation process for me would be acrimonious
  and would not serve the interests of the Federal Reserve, the administration
   or, ultimately, the interests of the nation’s ongoing economic recovery.”

For Mr. Obama, the concession by Mr. Summers ends a frustrating period
 in which the most private of White House deliberations became a public
  spectacle and fodder for an ugly disagreement among the president’s
   supporters and allies.

Reports earlier this summer that Mr. Obama was nearing a decision to
 name Mr. Summers to lead the Federal Reserve provoked outrage among
  some liberals in Congress, and forced a rare defense of him by Mr. Obama
   behind closed doors on Capitol Hill.

In a closed meeting with the House Democratic Caucus in July, Mr. Obama
 offered a strong defense of Mr. Summers’s contributions to the economic
  health of the country and said he was being unfairly maligned by critics.

The White House tried to quiet critics of Mr. Summers by indicating that
 a decision on who should lead the Fed was months away. In an interview
  with The New York Times on July 24, Mr. Obama said that he had not yet decided.

“I have not made a final decision,” he said. “I’ve narrowed it down to
 some extraordinarily qualified candidates.”

Throughout much of the summer, the candidates appeared to be Mr. Summers
 and Ms. Yellen, and each drew support from different parts of the Democratic Party.

Advocates for Ms. Yellen argued that she was better equipped to take the
 helm of the nation’s central bank at a time when the economy was still
  recovering slowly. Progressives argued that she would be more likely
   to continue the Fed’s policies of stimulating the economy.

But much of the advocacy behind Ms. Yellen was framed as a critique of
 Mr. Summers. Many liberals said Mr. Summers was too closely connected
  to Wall Street and to the culture of deregulation that they blamed for the economic crisis.

In a letter signed by 20 Senate Democrats in July, the lawmakers urged
 Mr. Obama to nominate Ms. Yellen saying that “at a time of persistently
  high national unemployment, the next chairman must focus on returning
   our economy to full employment.”